[DOC] Sequence tutorial 2.0 (#814)
seqan/seqan3: doc/tutorial/sequence_file/index.md

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp modify_file_extensions

# Fields {#section_sequence_files}

The Sequence file abstraction supports reading four different fields:

  1. seqan3::field::SEQ
  2. seqan3::field::ID
  3. seqan3::field::QUAL
  4. seqan3::field::SEQ_QUAL

The first three fields are retrieved by default (and in that order!).
The last field may be selected to directly store sequence and qualities in a more memory-efficient
combined container (see seqan3::qualified).
This is more advanced than what we cover here,

> but if you are still interested you can take a look at the *Alignment File Tutorial* which introduces reading a file with custom selected fields.

Reviewer: line break

```
\endsolution

## The record type

In the examples above, we always use `auto` to deduce the record type automatically.

> In case you need the type explicitly , e.g. if you want to store the records in a variable,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you need the type explicitly ,e.g. if you want to store the records in a variable,
```

you can access the type member seqan3::sequence_file_input::record_type.

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp record_type

> You can move the data out of the file if you want to store it somewhere without copying.

Author: I switched the word data->record. I think when you see the snippet it is more clear.

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp record_type2

\assignment{Exercise: Storing records in a std::vector}

Create a small program that reads in a FASTA file and stores all the records in a std::vector.

> After reading, print out the vector (this works directly with the seqan3::debug_stream).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After reading, print the vector (this works natively with the seqan3::debug_stream).
```

Test your program with the following file:

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_solution2.cpp fasta_file

It should print the following:

```console
[(AGCT,seq1,),(CGATCGA,seq2,)]
```
Note that the quality is empty in the third tuple entry because we are reading a FASTA file.

\endassignment
\solution
\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_solution2.cpp solution
\endsolution

# Sequence files as views

Since SeqAn files are ranges, you can also create views over files.
This enables us to create solutions for lot of use cases using only a few lines of code.

## Reading a file in chunks

A common use case is to read chunks from a file instead of the whole file at once or line by line.

> You can do so easily on a file range by using the ranges::view::chunk.

Reviewer: The snippet does not show the include?

Also, is chunk gonna be in the standard? Then you should add an alias and use std::view::chunk

Author: it did not make it into the standard. I will add this as a todo in ranges.

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp read_in_batches

The example above will iterate over the file by reading 10 records at a time.
If no 10 records are available any more, it will just print the remaining records.

## Applying a filter to a file

In some occasions you are only interested in sequence records that fulfill a certain criteria,
e.g. having a minimum sequence length or a minimum average quality.
Just like in the example with *ranges::view::chunk* you can use *std::ranges::filter* for this purpose:

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp quality_filter

To remind you what you have learned in the \ref tutorial_ranges tutorial before,
a view is not applied immediately but **lazy evaluated**.
That means your file is still parsed record by record and not at once.

## Reading paired-end reads

> In modern Next Generation Sequences experiments you often have paired-end read data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In modern Next Generation Sequencing experiments you often have paired-end read data
```

which is split into two files.
The read pairs are identified by their identical name/id

> and their order in the two files is the same.

Reviewer 2: their position instead of order, maybe?

```
\endsolution

## The record type

In the examples above, we always use `auto` to deduce the record type automatically.
In case you need the type explicitly, e.g. if you want to store the records in a variable,
you can access the type member seqan3::sequence_file_input::record_type.

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp record_type

You can move the record out of the file if you want to store it somewhere without copying.

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_snippets.cpp record_type2

\assignment{Exercise: Storing records in a std::vector}

Create a small program that reads in a FASTA file and stores all the records in a std::vector.

After reading, print the vector (this works natively with the seqan3::debug_stream).

Test your program with the following file:

\snippet doc/tutorial/sequence_file/sequence_file_solution2.cpp fasta_file

It should print the following:

```console
[(AGCT,seq1,),(CGATCGA,seq2,)]
```

> Note that the quality is empty in the third tuple entry because we are reading a FASTA file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the quality (third tuple element) is empty because we are reading a FASTA file.
```
OSLT
